Whiles we are suitors to their throne, decays the thing we sue for.
I shall do well.
The people love me, and the sea is mine.
My powers are crescent,
and my auguring hope says it will come to the full.
Mark Antony in Egypt sits at dinner
and will make no wars without doors.
Caesar gets money where he loses hearts.
Lepidus flatters both, of both is flattered,
but he neither loves nor either cares for him.
Caesar and Lepidus are in the field.
A mighty strength they carry.
Where have you this? 'Tis false.
From Silvius, sir.
He dreams.
I know they are in Rome together looking for Antony.
But all the charms of love salt Cleopatra,
soften thy waned lip.
Let witchcraft join with beauty, lust with both.
Tie up the libertine in a field of feasts.
Keep his brain fuming.
Epicurean cooks sharpen with cloyless sauce his appetite,
that sleep and feeding may prorogue his honor
even till a lethe'd dullness.
Mark Antony is every hour in Rome expected.
Since he went from Egypt, 'tis a space for further travel.
I did not think this amorous surfeiter
would have donned his helm for such a petty war.
His soldiership is twice the other twain,
but let us rear the higher our opinion
that our stirring can from the lap of Egypt's widow
pluck the never-lust-wearied Antony.
I cannot hope Caesar and Antony shall well greet together.
Were it not that we stand up against them all,
'twere pregnant they should square between themselves,
for they have entertained cause enough to draw their swords.
But how the fear of us may cement their division
and bind up the petty difference we yet not know.
Be it as our gods will have it.
It only stands our lives upon to use our strongest hands.
Good Enobarbus,
'tis a worthy deed and shall become you well
to entreat your captain to soft and gentle speech.
'Tis not a time for private stomaching.
Every time serves for the matter that is then born in it.
But small to greater matters must give way.
Not if the small come first.
Your speech is passion,
but, pray you, stir no embers up.
Here comes the noble Antony.
Noble friends,
that which combined us was most great,
and let not a leaner action rend us.
What's amiss, may it be gently heard.
When we debate our trivial difference loud,
we do commit murder in healing wounds.
Then, noble partners,
the rather, for I earnestly beseech,
touch you the sourest points with sweetest terms
nor curstness grow to the matter.
'Tis spoken well.
Were we before our armies and to fight, I should do thus.
Welcome to Rome.
Thank you.
Sit.
Sit, sir.
Nay, then.
I learn, you take things ill which are not so
or being concern you not.
I must be laughed at, if or for nothing or a little,
I should say myself offended,
and with you chiefly in the world.
My being in Egypt, Caesar, what was it to you?
No more than my residing here at Rome might be to you in Egypt.
Yet if you there did practice on my state,
your being in Egypt might be my question.
How intend you, practiced?
You may be pleased to catch at mine intent
by what did here befall me.
Your wife and brother made wars upon me,
and their contestation was theme for you.
You were the word of war.
You do mistake your business.
My brother never did urge me in his act.
Of this my letters before did satisfy you.
If you'll patch a quarrel,
as matter whole you have not to make it with,
it must not be with this.
As for my wife,
I would you had her spirit in such another.
The third of the world is yours,
which with a snaffle you may pace easy
but not such a wife.
So much uncurbable, her garboils, Caesar,
made out of her impatience,
which not wanted shrewdness of policy too.
I grieving grant did you too much disquiet.
For that, you must but say, I could not help it.
I wrote to you;
when rioting in Alexandria you did pocket up my letters
with taunts did gibe my missive out of audience.
Sir, he fell upon me ere admitted then.
Three kings I had newly feasted
and did want of what I was in the morning.
But next day I told him of myself,
which was as much as to have asked him pardon.
Let this fellow be nothing of our strife.
If we contend out of our question, wipe him.
You have broken the article of your oath,
which you shall never have tongue to charge me with.
Soft, Caesar.
No, Lepidus, let him speak.
The honor is sacred which he talks on now,
supposing that I lacked it.
But on, Caesar.
The article of my oath.
To lend me arms and aid when I required them,
the which you both denied.
Neglected, rather,
and then when poisoned hours had bound me up
from mine own knowledge.
As nearly as I may, I'll play the penitent to you.
But mine honesty shall not make poor my greatness
nor my power work without it.
Truth is, that Fulvia,
to have me out of Egypt, made wars here,
for which myself, the ignorant motive,
do so far ask pardon as befits mine honor
to stoop in such a case.
'Tis noble spoken.
If it might please you,
to enforce no further the griefs between ye,
to forget them quite,
and to remember that the present need
speaks to atone you.
Worthily spoken.
Or if you borrow one another's love for the instant,
you may, when you hear no more words of Pompey,
return it again.
You shall have time to wrangle in when you have nothing else to do.
Thou art a soldier only; speak no more.
That truth should be silent I had almost forgot.
You wrong this presence, therefore, speak no more.
Go to then your considerate stone.
I do not much dislike the matter
but the manner of his speech.
For it cannot be we shall remain in friendship,
our conditions so differing in their acts.
Yet if I knew what hoop should hold us staunch,
from edge to edge of the world I would pursue it.
Give me leave, Caesar.
Speak, Agrippa.
Thou hast a sister by the mother's sideó
admired Octavia.
Great Mark Antony is now a widower.
Say not so, Agrippa.
If Cleopatra heard you,
your reproof were well deserved of rashness.
I am not married, Caesar.
Let me hear Agrippa further speak.
To hold you in perpetual amity, to make you brothers,
and to knit your hearts with an unslipping knot,
take Antony Octavia to his wife,
whose beauty claims no worse a husband than the best of men,
whose virtue and whose general graces speak that
which none else can utter.
By this marriage,
all little jealousies, which now seem great,
and all great fears, which now import their dangers,
would then be nothing.
Truths would be tales where now half tales be truths.
Her love to both would,
each to other and all loves to both, draw after her.
Pardon what I have spoke,
for 'tis a studied,
not a present thought by duty ruminated.
Will Caesar speak?
Not till he hears how Antony is touched with what is spoke already.
What power is in Agrippa?
If I would say, "Agrippa, be it so," to make this good?
The power of Caesar and his power unto Octavia.
May I never,
to this good purpose that so fairly shows,
dream of impediment!
Let me have your hand further this act of grace
and from this hour the heart of brothers govern in our loves
and sway our great designs.
There is my hand.
A sister I bequeath you,
whom no brother did ever love so dearly.
Let her live to join our kingdoms and our hearts
and never fly off our loves again.
Happily, amen!
I did not think to draw my sword against Pompey,
for he hath laid strange courtesies
and great of late upon me.
I must thank him only
lest my remembrance suffer ill report.
At heel of that, defy him.
Time calls upon us.
Of us must Pompey presently be sought,
or else he seeks out us.
Where lies he?
About the mount Misenum.
What is his force by land?
Great and increasing,
but by sea, he's an absolute master.
So is the fame.
Would we had spoke together.
Haste we for it.
Yet ere we put ourselves in arms,
dispatch we the business we have talked of.
With most gladness
and do invite you to my sister's view.
Whither straight I'll lead you.
Let us, Lepidus, not lack your company.
Noble Antony, not sickness should detain me.
Welcome from Egypt, sir.
Good Enobarbus!
We have cause to be glad that matters are so well digested.
You stayed well by it in Egypt.
Ay, sir; we did sleep day out of countenance
and made the night light with drinking.
Eight wild boars roasted whole at a breakfast
and but twelve persons there, is this true?
This was but as a fly by an eagle.
We had much more monstrous matter of feast,
which worthily deserved the noting.
She's a most triumphant lady, if report be square to her.
When she first met Mark Antony,
she pursed up his heart upon the river of Cydnus.
There she appeared indeed,
or my reporter devised well for her.
I'll tell you.
The barge she sat in, like a burnished throne,
burned on the water.
The poop was beaten gold.
Purple the sails and so perfumed
that the winds were love-sick with them.
The oars were silver,
which to the tune of flutes kept stroke,
and made the water, which they beat to follow faster,
as amorous of their strokes.
For her own person, it beggared all description.
She did lie in her pavilion,
cloth-of-gold of tissue,
over-picturing that Venus
where we see the fancy outwork nature.
On each side her stood pretty dimpled boys,
like smiling Cupids with divers-colored fans,
whose wind did seem to glow the delicate cheeks
which they did cool and what they undid did.
O, rare for Antony.
Her gentlewomen, like the Nereides,
so many mermaids, tended her in the eyes
and made their bends adornings.
At the helm a seeming mermaid steers.
The silken tackle swell with the touches
of those flower-soft hands
that yarely frame the office.
From the barge, a strange invisible perfume
hits the sense off the adjacent wharfs.
The city cast her people out upon her;
and Antony, enthroned in the marketplace,
did sit alone, whistling to the air,
which, but for vacancy, had gone to gaze on Cleopatra too
and made a gap in nature.
Rare Egyptian!
Upon her landing, Antony sent to her,
invited her to supper.
She replied it should be better he became her guest,
which she entreated.
Our courteous Antony,
whom never the word of "no" woman heard speak,
being barbered ten times over,
goes to the feast,
and for his ordinary,
pays his heart for what his eyes eat only.
Royal wench.
She made great Caesar lay his sword to bed.
He plowed her, and she cropped.
I saw her once hop forty paces
through the public street,
and having lost her breath, she spoke and panted
that she did make defect perfection.
And, breathless, power breathe forth.
Now Antony must leave her utterly.
Never; he will not.
Age cannot wither her,
nor custom stale her infinite variety.
Other women cloy the appetites they feed,
but she makes hungry where most she satisfies,
for vilest things become themselves in her
that the holy priests bless her when she is riggish.
If beauty, wisdom, modesty,
can settle the heart of Antony,
Octavia is a blessed lottery to him.
The world and my great office
will sometimes divide me from your bosom.
All which time before the gods
my knee shall bow my prayers to them for you.
Good night, sir.
My Octavia, read not my blemishes in the world's report.
I have not kept my square,
but that to come shall all be done by the rule.
Good night, dear lady.
Good night, sir.
Good night.
Now, sirrah, you do wish yourself in Egypt?
Would I had never come from thence, nor you thither.
If you can, your reason?
I see it in my motion, have it not in my tongue,
but yet hie you to Egypt again.
Say to me,
whose fortunes shall rise higher, Caesar's or mine?
Caesar's.
Therefore, O Antony, stay not by his side.
Thy demon that's thy spirit which keeps thee
is noble, courageous, high, unmatchable,
where Caesar's is not.
But near him, thy angel becomes a fear as being overpowered.
Therefore, make space enough between you.
Speak this no more.
If thou dost play with him at any game, thou art sure to lose.
And of that natural luck, he beats thee against the odds.
Thy luster thickens when he shines by.
I say again, thy spirit is all afraid to govern thee near him,
but he away, 'tis noble.
Get thee gone.
Say to Ventidius I would speak with him.
He shall to Parthia.
Be it art or hap, he hath spoken true.
The very dice obey him.
And in our sports, my better cunning faints under his chance.
If we draw lots, he speeds.
His cocks do win the battle still of mine
when it is all to naught,
and his quails ever beat mine, inhooped, at odds.
I will to Egypt.
And though I make this marriage for my peace,
in the east my pleasure lies.
O, come, Ventidius; you must to Parthia.
Your commission's ready. Follow me and receive it.
Give me some music.
Music, moody food of us that trade in love.
Let it alone.
Let's to billiards. Come, Charmian.
My arm is sore; best play with Mardian.
As well a woman with an eunuch played as with a woman.
Come, you'll play with me, sir?
As well as I can, madam.
And when goodwill is showed, though it come too short,
the actor may plead pardon.
I'll none now.
Give me mine angle.
We'll to the river.
There, my music playing far off,
I will betray tawny-finned fishes.
My bended hook shall pierce their slimy jaws.
And as I draw them up,
I'll think them every one an Antony
and say, "Ah, ha! You're caught."
'Twas merry when you wagered on your angling.
When your diver did hang a salt-fish on his hook,
which he with fervency drew up.
That timeóO times!
I laughed him out of patience.
And that night, I laughed him into patience.
And next morn, ere the ninth hour,
I drunk him to his bed,
then put my tires and mantles on him,
whilst I wore his sword Philippan.
O, from Italy.
Ram thou thy fruitful tidings in mine ears
that long time have been barren.
Madam, madamó
Antony is dead.
If thou say so, villain, I'll kill'st thy mistress.
But well and free, if thou so yield him, there is gold.
And here my bluest veins to kiss,
a hand that kings have lipped and trembled kissing.
First, madam, he is well.
Why, there's more gold.
But, sirrah, mark, we use to say the dead are well.
Bring it to that, the gold I give thee will I melt
and pour down thy ill-uttering throat.
Good madam, hear me.
Well, go to, I will.
but there's no goodness in thy face.
If Antony be free and healthful,
why so tart a favor to trumpet such good tidings?
If not well, thou shouldst come like a fury crowned with snakes,
not like a formal man.
Will it please you hear me?
I have a mind to strike thee ere thou speak'st.
Yet if thou say Antony lives, is well,
or friends with Caesar, or not captive to him,
I'll set thee in a shower of gold
and hail rich pearls upon thee.
Madam, he's well.
Well said.
And friends with Caesar.
Thou art an honest man.
Caesar and he are greater friends than ever.
Make thee a fortune from me.
But yet, madamó
I do not like "but yet."
It does allay the good precedence.
Fie upon "but yet."
"But yet" is as a jailer to bring forth some monstrous malefactor.
Prithee, friend, pour out the pack of matter to mine ear.
The good and bad together: he's friends with Caesar,
in state of health thou say'st,
and thou say'st free.
Free, madam, no; I make no such report.
He's bound unto Octavia.
For what good turn?
For the best turn in the bed.
I am pale, Charmian.
Madam, he's married to Octavia.
The most infectious pestilence upon thee!
Good madam, patience.
What say you?
Hence, horrible villain,
or I'll spurn thine eyes like balls before me.
I'll unhair thy head.
Thou shalt be whipped with wire, stewed in brine,
smarting in lingering pickle.
Gracious madam, I that do bring the news made not the match.
Say 'tis not so, a province I will give thee
and make thy fortunes proud.
The blow thou hadst shall make thy peace for moving me to rage.
And I will boot thee with what gift beside thy modesty can beg.
He's married, madam.
Rogue, thou hast lived too long.
Nay, then I'll run.
What mean you, madam? I have made no fault.
Good madam, keep yourself within yourself. The man is innocent.
Some innocents 'scape not the thunderbolt.
Melt Egypt into Nile,
and kindly creatures turn all to serpents!
Call the slave again.
Though I am mad, I will not bite himócall!
He is afeard to come.
I will not hurt him!
These hands do lack nobility
that they strike a meaner than myself
since I myself have given myself the cause.
Come hither, sir.
Though it be honest, it is never good to bring bad news.
Give to a gracious message an host of tongues,
but let ill tidings tell themselves when they be felt.
I have done my duty.
Is he married?
I cannot hate thee worser than I do if thou again say "yes."
He's married, madam.
The gods confound thee!
Dost thou hold there still?
Should I lie, madam?
O, I would thou didst,
so half my Egypt were submerged
and made a cistern for scaled snakes!
Go, get thee hence.
Hadst thou Narcissus in thy face,
to me, thou wouldst appear most ugly.
He is married?
I crave your highness' pardon.
Take no offense that I would not offend you.
To punish me for what you make me do seems much unequal.
He is married to Octavia.
O, that his fault should make a knave of thee
that art not what thou art sure of.
Get thee hence.
The merchandise that thou hast brought from Rome
are all too dear for me.
Lie they upon my hand and be undone by 'em.
Good Your Highness, patience.
In praising Antony, I have dispraised Caesar.
Many times, madam.
I am paid for it now.
Lead me from hence. I faint.
O Iras!
Charmian!
'Tis no matter.
Go to the fellow, good Alexas.
Bid him report the feature of Octaviaó
her years, her inclination.
Let him not leave out the color of her hair.
Bring me word quickly.
Let him forever go.
Let him not.
Charmian, though he be painted one way like a Gorgon,
the other way's a Mars.
Bid you, Alexas, bring me word how tall she is.
Pity me, Charmian,
but do not speak to me.
To you all three,
the senators alone of this great world,
chief factors for the gods,
I do not know wherefore my father should revengers want,
having a son and friends,
since Julius Caesar,
who at Philippi the good Brutus ghosted,
there saw you laboring for him.
What was it that moved pale Cassius to conspire?
And what made the all-honored, honest Roman Brutus,
with the armed rest, courtiers of beauteous freedom,
to drench the capitol?
But that they would have one man but a man?
And that is it hath made me rig my navy
at whose burden the angered ocean foams,
with which I meant to scourge the ingratitude
that despiteful Rome cast on my noble father.
Take your time.
Thou canst not fear us, Pompey, with thy sails.
We'll speak with thee at sea.
At land, thou know'st how much we do overcount thee.
At land, indeed,
thou dost overcount me of my father's house.
But since the cuckoo builds not for himself,
remain in it as thou mayst.
Be pleased to tell usó
for this is from the presentó
how you take the offers we have sent you.
There's the point.
Which do not be entreated to,
but weigh what it is worth embraced.
And what may follow, to try a larger fortune.
You have made me offer of Sicily, Sardinia,
and I must rid all the sea of pirates,
then to send measures of wheat to Rome.
This agreed upon to part with unhacked edges
and bear back our targes undinted.
That's our offer.
Know, then, I came before you here
a man prepared to take this offer,
but Mark Antony put me to some impatience.
Though I lose the praise of it by telling, you must know,
when Caesar and your brother were at blows,
your mother came to Sicily and did find her welcome friendly.
I have heard it, Pompey,
and am well studied for a liberal thanks,
which I do owe you.
Let me have your hand.
I did not think, sir, to have met you here.
The beds in the east are soft,
and thanks to you that called me timelier than my purpose hither,
for I have gained by it.
Since I saw you last, there is a change upon you.
Well, I know not what counts
harsh fortune casts upon my face,
but in my bosom shall she never come
to make my heart her vassal.
Well met here.
I hope so, Lepidus.
Thus we are agreed.
I crave our composition may be written and sealed between us.
That's the next to do.
We'll feast each other ere we part.
And let's draw lots who shall begin.
That will I, Pompey.
No, Antony, take the lot.
But, first or last,
your fine Egyptian cookery shall have the fame.
I have heard Julius Caesar grew fat with feasting there.
You have heard much.
I have fair meanings, sir.
And fair words to them.
Then so much have I heard.
And I have heard, Apollodorus carriedó
No more of that: he did so.
What, I pray you?
A certain queen to Caesar in a mattress.
I know thee now; how farest thou, soldier?
Well, and well am like to do,
for I perceive four feasts are toward.
Let me shake thy hand.
I've never hated thee.
I have seen thee fight, when I have envied thy behavior.
Sir, I never loved you much, but I have praised you
when you have well deserved ten times as much as I have said you did.
Enjoy thy plainness.
It nothing ill becomes thee.
Will you lead, lords?
You and I have known, sir.
At sea, I think.
We have, sir.
You have done well by water.
And you by land.
I will praise any man that will praise me,
though it cannot be denied what I have done by land.
Nor what I have done by water.
Yes, something you can deny for your own safety.
You have been a great thief by sea.
And you by land.
There I deny my land service.
But give me your hand, Menas.
If our eyes had authority,
here they might take two thieves kissing.
All men's faces are true whatsome'er their hands are.
But there is never a fair woman has a true face.
No slander; they steal hearts.
We came hither to fight with you.
For my part, I am sorry it is turned to a drinking.
Pompey doth this day laugh away his fortune.
If he do, sure, he cannot weep it back again.
You've said, sir.
We looked not for Mark Antony here.
Pray you, is he married to Cleopatra?
Caesar's sister is called Octavia.
True, sir; she was the wife of Caius Marcellus.
But she is now the wife of Marcus Antonius.
Pray ye, sir?
'Tis true.
Then is Caesar and he forever knit together.
If I were bound to divine of this unity,
I would not prophesy so.
I think the policy of that purpose made more in the marriage
than the love of the parties.
I think so too.
But you shall find the band that seems to tie their friendship together
will be the very strangler of their amity.
Octavia is of a holy, cold, and still conversation.
Who would not have his wife so?
Not he that himself is not so, which is Mark Antony.
He will to his Egyptian dish again.
Then shall the sighs of Octavia blow the fire up in Caesar.
And as I said before,
that which is the strength of their amity
shall prove the immediate author of their variance.
Antony will use his affection where it is.
He married but his occasion here.
And thus it may be.
Thus do they, sir.
They take the flow of the Nile
by certain scales in the pyramid.
They know by the height, the lowness, or the mean
if dearth or foison follow.
The higher Nilus swells, the more it promises.
As it ebbs, the seedsman, upon the slime and ooze,
scatters his grain and shortly comes to harvest.
You have strange serpents there.
Ay, Lepidus.
Your serpent of Egypt is bred now of your mud
by the operation of your sun.
So is your crocodile.
A health to Lepidus!
I am not so well as I should be,
but I'll ne'er out.
Not till you have slept;
I fear me you'll be in till then.
Nay, certainly, I have heard
the Ptolemies' pyramises are very goodly things.
Without contradiction, I have heard that.
Pompey, a word.
Say in mine ear; what is it?
Forsake thy seat, I do beseech thee, Captain, and hear me speak a word.
Forbear me till anon.
This wine for Lepidus!
What manner of thing is your crocodile?
It is shaped, sir, like itself.
And it is as broad as it hath breadth.
It is just so high as it is
and moves with its own organs.
It lives by that which nourisheth it,
and the elements, once out of it,
it transmigrates.
What color is it of?
Of its own color too.
'Tis a strange serpent.
'Tis so, and the tears of it are wet.
Will this description satisfy him?
With the health that Pompey gives him, else he is a very epicure.
Go hang, sir, hang!
Tell me of that? Away!
Do as I bid you.
Where's this cup I called for?
If for the sake of merit thou wilt hear me,
rise from thy stool.
I think thou art mad.
These quicksands, Lepidus, keep off them, for you sink.
The matter?
I have ever held my cap off to thy fortunes.
Thou hast served me with much faith.
What else to say?
Be jolly, lords.
Wilt thou be lord of all the world?
What sayest thou?
Wilt thou be lord of the whole world that's twice?
How should that be?
But entertain it, and though thou think me poor,
I am the man will give thee all the world.
Hast thou drunk well?
Now, Pompey, I have kept me from the cup.
Thou art, if thou darest be, the earthly Jove.
Whatever the ocean pales or sky inclips is thine if thou wilt have it.
Show me which way.
These three world-sharers, these competitors are in thy vessel.
Let me cut the cable and, when we are put off,
fall to their throatsó all there is thine.
Ah, this thou shouldst have done
and not have spoke on it!
In me, 'tis villainy; in thee, it had been good service.
Thou must know 'tis not my profit that doth lead mine honor.
Mine honor, it.
Repent that e'er thy tongue hath so betrayed thine act.
Being done unknown,
I should afterwards have found it well done
but must condemn it now.
Desist and drink.
For this, I'll never follow thy palled fortunes more.
Who seeks and will not take when once 'tis offered
shall never find it more.
This health for Lepidus!
Bear him ashore.
I'll pledge it for him, Pompey.
Here's to thee, Menas!
Enobarbus, welcome!
Fill till the cup be hid.
There's a strong fellow, Menas.
Why?
A' bears the third part of the world in arms, man;
see'st not?
The third part then is drunk.
Would it were all that it might go on wheels.
Drink thou; increase the reels.
Come.
This is not yet an Alexandrian feast.
It ripens towards it.
Strike the vessels, ho?
Here's to Caesar!
I could well forbear it.
It's monstrous labor when I wash my brain
and it grows fouler.
Be a child of the time.
Possess it, I'll make answer.
But I'd rather fast from all four days
than drink so much in one.
Ha, my brave emperor!
Shall we dance now the Egyptian bacchanals
and celebrate our drink?
Let's have it, good soldier.
Come, let's all take hands
till that the conquering wine hath steeped our sense
in soft and delicate Lethe.
All take hands.
Make battery to our ears with the loud music.
What would you more?
Pompey, good night.
Good brother, let me request you off.
Our graver business frowns at this levity.
Gentle lords, let's part.
You see we have burnt our cheeks.
Strong Enobarb is weaker than the wine.
And mine own tongue splits what it speaks.
The wild disguise hath almost anticked us all.
What needs more words?
Good night.
Good Antony, your hand.
I'll try you on the shore.
And shall, sir; give us your hand.
O Antony, you have my father's house.
But, what? We are friends.
Come, down into the boats.
Take heed you fall not.
Menas!
I'll not on shore.
No, to my cabin.
These drums, these trumpets, flutes!
What!
Let Neptune hear we bid a loud farewell
to these great fellows.